EZP-32155: Add a custom limitation example (3.3) (#1461)
ibexa/documentation-developer: docs/guide/custom_policies.md

The content Repository uses [Roles and Policies](permissions.md) to give Users access to different functions of the system.

> Any bundle can expose available Policies via a `PolicyProvider` which can be added to EzPublishCoreBundle's [service container](../api/public_php_api.md#service-container) extension.

Author: ```suggestion
Any bundle can expose available Policies via a `PolicyProvider` which can be added to EzPublishCoreBundle's [service container](public_php_api.md#service-container) extension.
```

## PolicyProvider

A `PolicyProvider` object provides a hash containing declared modules, functions and Limitations.

- Each Policy provider provides a collection of permission *modules*.

> - Each module can provide *functions* (For example, in `content/read`, "content" is the module, and "read" is the function)

Author: ```suggestion
- Each module can provide *functions* (for example, in `content/read`, "content" is the module, and "read" is the function)
```

]
```

Limitations need to be implemented as *Limitation types* and declared as services identified with `ezpublish.limitationType` tag.
Name provided in the hash for each Limitation is the same value set in the `alias` attribute in the service tag.

For example:

``` php

> <?php

Author: ```suggestion
<?php declare(strict_types=1);
```

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/src/Resources/config/policies.yaml') =]]
```

### Translations

Provide translations for your custom policies in the `forms` domain.

For example, `translations/forms.en.yaml`:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/translations/forms.en.yaml') =]]
```

### Extending existing Policies

A `PolicyProvider` may provide new functions to a module, and additional Limitations to an existing function.
**It's however strongly encouraged to add functions to your own Policy modules.**

It's impossible to remove an existing module, function or limitation from a Policy.

## Integrating the `PolicyProvider` into EzPublishCoreBundle

For a `PolicyProvider` to be active, you have to register it in the class `src/Kernel.php`:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/src/Kernel.php') =]]
```

## Custom Limitation type

For a custom module function, existing limitation types can be used or custom ones can be created.

The base of a custom limitation is a class to store values for the usage of this limitation in roles, and a class to implement the limitation's logic.

> The value class extends `eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\User\Limitation` and says for which limitation it's used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value class extends `eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\User\Limitation` and specifies the limitation for which it's used:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/src/Security/Limitation/CustomLimitationValue.php') =]]
```

The type class implements `eZ\Publish\SPI\Limitation\Type`.

> - `accept`, `validate` and `buildValue` implement the value class usage logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `accept`, `validate` and `buildValue` implement the logic for using the value class.
```

> - `evaluate` challenges a limitation value against the current user, the subject object and other context objects to return if the limitation is satisfied or not. `evaluate` is, among others, used by `PermissionResolver::canUser` (to check if a user having access to a function can use it in its limitations) and `PermissionResolver::lookupLimitations`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `evaluate` assesses a limitation value against the current user, the subject object, and other context objects to determine if the limitation is satisfied or not. `evaluate` is used, among others places, by `PermissionResolver::canUser` (to check if a user with access to a function can use it in its limitations) and `PermissionResolver::lookupLimitations`.
```

```php
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/src/Security/Limitation/CustomLimitationType.php') =]]
```

> The type class is set as a service tagged `ezpublish.limitationType` with an alias to identify it, and to link it to the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type class is registered as a service tagged with `ezpublish.limitationType` and given an alias to identify it, as well as to link it to the value.
```

``` yaml
services:
    # …
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/config/append_to_services.yaml', 1, 4) =]]
```

### Custom Limitation type form

#### Form mapper

To provide support for editing custom policies in the Back Office, you need to implement [`EzSystems\EzPlatformAdminUi\Limitation\LimitationFormMapperInterface`](https://github.com/ezsystems/ezplatform-admin-ui/blob/master/src/lib/Limitation/LimitationFormMapperInterface.php).

- `mapLimitationForm` adds the limitation field as a child to a provided Symfony form.

> - `getFormTemplate` returns the path to the template to use for rendering the limitation form. Here it use [`form_label`]([[= symfony_doc =]]/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-label) and [`form_widget`]([[= symfony_doc =]]/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-widget) to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `getFormTemplate` returns the path to the template to use for rendering the limitation form. Here it uses [`form_label`]([[= symfony_doc =]]/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-label) and [`form_widget`]([[= symfony_doc =]]/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-widget) to do so.
```

> - `getFormTemplate` returns the path to the template to use for rendering the limitation form. Here it use [`form_label`](https://symfony.com/doc/5.4/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-label) and [`form_widget`](https://symfony.com/doc/5.4/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-widget) to do so.

Author: ```suggestion
- `getFormTemplate` returns the path to the template to use for rendering the limitation form. Here it use [`form_label`]([[= symfony_doc =]]/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-label) and [`form_widget`]([[= symfony_doc =]]/form/form_customization.html#reference-forms-twig-widget) to do so.
```

- `filterLimitationValues` is triggered when the form is submitted and can manipulate the limitation values, such as normalizing them.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/src/Security/Limitation/Mapper/CustomLimitationFormMapper.php') =]]
```

And provide a template corresponding to `getFormTemplate`.

``` html+twig
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/templates/themes/admin/limitation/custom_limitation_form.html.twig') =]]
```

Next, register the service with the `ez.limitation.formMapper` tag and set the `limitationType` attribute to the Limitation type's identifier:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/config/append_to_services.yaml', 5, 8) =]]
```

#### Notable form mappers to extend

> Some abstract Limitation type form mapper classes are provided to help implementing common complexe Limitations.

Author: ```suggestion
Some abstract Limitation type form mapper classes are provided to help implementing common complex Limitations.
```

> - `MultipleSelectionBasedMapper` is mapper to build form for Limitation based on checkbox list where multiple items can be chosen. For example, it's used to build forms for [Content Type Limitation](limitation_reference.md#content-type-limitation), [Language Limitation](limitation_reference.md#language-limitation) or [Section Limitation](limitation_reference.md#section-limitation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `MultipleSelectionBasedMapper` is a mapper used to build forms for Limitation based on checkbox lists, where multiple items can be chosen. For example, it's used to build forms for [Content Type Limitation](limitation_reference.md#content-type-limitation), [Language Limitation](limitation_reference.md#language-limitation) or [Section Limitation](limitation_reference.md#section-limitation).
```

> - `UDWBasedMapper` is to build Limitation form where a Content/Location must be selected. For example, it's used by the [Subtree Limitation](limitation_reference.md#subtree-of-location-limitation) form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `UDWBasedMapper` is used to build Limitation form where a Content/Location must be selected. For example, it's used by the [Subtree Limitation](limitation_reference.md#subtree-of-location-limitation) form.
```

#### Value mapper

By default, without a value mapper, the Limitation value is rendered using the block `ez_limitation_value_fallback` of the template [`vendor/ezsystems/ezplatform-admin-ui/src/bundle/Resources/views/themes/admin/limitation/limitation_values.html.twig`](https://github.com/ezsystems/ezplatform-admin-ui/blob/2.3/src/bundle/Resources/views/themes/admin/limitation/limitation_values.html.twig#L1-L6).

> To customize the rendering, a value mapper eventually transforms the Limitation value and send it to a custom template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To customize the rendering, a value mapper eventually transforms the Limitation value and sends it to a custom template.
```

The value mapper implements [`EzSystems\EzPlatformAdminUi\Limitation\LimitationValueMapperInterface`](https://github.com/ezsystems/ezplatform-admin-ui/blob/master/src/lib/Limitation/LimitationValueMapperInterface.php).

> Its `mapLimitationValue` function returns the Limitation value transformed for the needs of the template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its `mapLimitationValue` function returns the Limitation value adjusted to the needs of the template.
```
OR
```suggestion
Its `mapLimitationValue` function returns the Limitation value transformed to meet the requirements of the the template.
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/src/Security/Limitation/Mapper/CustomLimitationValueMapper.php') =]]
```

Then register the service with the `ez.limitation.valueMapper` tag and set the `limitationType` attribute to Limitation type's identifier:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/config/append_to_services.yaml', 9, 12) =]]
```

> When a value mapper exists for a Limitation, the rendering uses a Twig block named `ez_limitation_<lower_case_identifier>_value` where `<lower_case_identifier>` is the Limitation identifier in lower case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a value mapper exists for a Limitation, the rendering uses a Twig block named `ez_limitation_<lower_case_identifier>_value` where `<lower_case_identifier>` is the Limitation identifier in a lower case.
```

> In this example, block name is `ez_limitation_customlimitation_value` as the identifier is `CustomLimitation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, `ez_limitation_customlimitation_value` is a block name and  `CustomLimitation` is an identifier.
```

Author: @MagdalenaZuba 
```suggestion
In this example, `ez_limitation_customlimitation_value` is the block name, and `CustomLimitation` is the identifier.
```

This template receive a `values` variable which is the return of the `mapLimitationValue` function from the corresponding value mapper.

``` html+twig
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/templates/themes/standard/limitation/custom_limitation_value.html.twig') =]]
```

To have your block found, you have to register its template. Add the template to the configuration under `ezplatform.system.<SCOPE>.limitation_value_templates`:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/config/packages/ezplatform_security.yaml') =]]
```

Provide translations for your custom limitation form in the `ezplatform_content_forms_policies` domain. For example, `translations/ezplatform_content_forms_policies.en.yaml`:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/back_office/limitation/translations/ezplatform_content_forms_policies.en.yaml') =]]
```

### Checking user custom Limitation

> To check if current user has this custom limitation set to true from a custom controller:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if the current user has this custom limitation set to true from a custom controller:

```

```php

> <?php

Author: ```suggestion
<?php declare(strict_types=1);
```

        - { name: 'ez.limitation.formMapper', limitationType: 'CustomLimitation' }
```

If you want to provide human-readable names of the custom Limitation values, you need to implement [`EzSystems\EzPlatformAdminUi\Limitation\LimitationValueMapperInterface`](https://github.com/ezsystems/ezplatform-admin-ui/blob/master/src/lib/Limitation/LimitationValueMapperInterface.php).

```php
<?php

namespace App\Security\Limitation\Mapper;

use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\User\Limitation;
use EzSystems\EzPlatformAdminUi\Limitation\LimitationValueMapperInterface;

class CustomLimitationValueMapper implements LimitationValueMapperInterface
{
    public function mapLimitationValue(Limitation $limitation)
    {
        return $limitation->limitationValues['value'];
    }
}
```

Then register the service with the `ez.limitation.valueMapper` tag and set the `limitationType` attribute to Limitation type's identifier:

```yaml
App\Security\Limitation\Mapper\CustomLimitationValueMapper:
    arguments:
        # ...
    tags:
        - { name: 'ez.limitation.valueMapper', limitationType: 'Custom' }
        - { name: 'ez.limitation.valueMapper', limitationType: 'CustomLimitation' }
```

> If you want to completely override the way of rendering custom Limitation values in the role view,

Author: This is not optional but mandatory

`An exception has been thrown during the rendering of a template ("Could not find a block for CustomLimitation: ez_limitation_customlimitation_value.").`

Author: As soon as a value mapper exist, the template is mandatory.

    system:
        default:
            limitation_value_templates:
                - { template: limitation/custom_limitation_value.html.twig, priority: 0 }

                - { template: '@ezdesign/limitation/custom_limitation_value.html.twig', priority: 0 }
```

!!! note
To check if current user has this custom limitation set to true from a custom controller:
```php
<?php

>     If you skip this part, Limitation values will be rendered using an [`ez_limitation_value_fallback`](https://github.com/ezsystems/repository-forms/blob/master/bundle/Resources/views/limitation_values.html.twig#L1-L6) block as comma-separated list.

Author: Have a better look to this. Maybe useful when using `MultipleSelectionBasedMapper`.

Author: https://github.com/ezsystems/repository-forms/blob/2.5/bundle/Resources/views/limitation_values.html.twig#L1
TODO: try if this fallback is used when there is no CustomLimitationValueMapper service.

Author: The fallback is used when the CustomLimitationValueMapper service is commented out.
